A woman’s uterus is lined with
endometrial cells.
In endometriosis,
dislocated cells called implants
grow on organ tissues located
outside the uterus.
The most common sites are the ovaries,
Fallopian tubes,
and other areas in the pelvic cavity.
Occasionally they move beyond the pelvic region.
Like the cells inside the uterus,
dislocated endometrial cells are
influenced by female hormones.
The tissue lining the uterus
thickens each month in preparation for pregnancy.
If no egg is implanted,
the tissue is shed through menstruation.
Along with the tissue inside the uterus,
the implants also become thicker,
break down, and bleed.
But there is no way to get rid of the excess tissue.
Scar tissue and adhesions can form
that distort the normal anatomy.
Pelvic pain and bleeding are the most
common symptoms of endometriosis.
Some women also have more
difficulty becoming pregnant.
Although the exact cause is unknown,
anatomical changes or problems
related to hormone production
may be responsible.
Whatever the cause,
it is believed to be worsened by estrogen.
Oral contraceptives and hormone therapy
can help control pain and shrink implants.
Implants and scar tissue may require
surgical removal,
in a surgical procedure, termed laparoscopy.